[DOCS] EQL: Document how sequence queries handle matches (#65794)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/eql/syntax.asciidoc

*** {eql-ref}/pipes.html#sort[`sort`]
*** {eql-ref}/pipes.html#unique[`unique`]
*** {eql-ref}/pipes.html#unique-count[`unique_count`]

[discrete]
[[eql-how-sequence-queries-handle-matches]]
==== How sequence queries handle matches

<<eql-sequences,Sequence queries>> don't find all potential matches for a
sequence. This approach would be too slow and costly for large event data sets.
Instead, a sequence query handles pending sequence matches as a
{wikipedia}/Finite-state_machine[state machine]:

* Each event item in the sequence query is a state in the machine.
* Only one pending sequence can be in each state at a time.
* If two pending sequences are in the same state at the same time, the most
recent sequence overwrites the older one.
* If the query includes <<eql-by-keyword,`by` fields>>, the query uses a
separate state machine for each unique `by` field value.

.*Example* 
[%collapsible]
====
A data set contains the following `process` events in ascending chronological
order:

[source,js]
----

> { "index" : { "_id" : "1" } }

Reviewer: is `_id` sorted by default? i can't remember how it fits into the sequence ordering. i think this is right, just want to double check

Reviewer: > A data set contains the following `process` events in ascending chronological
order: ...

ah, this is more of an abstraction and deliberately not filled in `...`. in that case i think we're good

Author: Yeah. I originally included the `@timestamp` but it looked kinda noisy.

{ "index" : { "_id" : "2" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "whoami" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "3" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "hostname" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "4" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "hostname" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "5" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "hostname" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "6" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "whoami" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "7" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "whoami" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "8" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "hostname" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "9" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "ifconfig" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "10" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "ifconfig" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "11" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "ifconfig" }, ...}
----
// NOTCONSOLE

An EQL sequence query searches the data set:

[source,eql]
----
sequence by user.name
  [process where process.name == "whoami"]
  [process where process.name == "hostname"]

>   [process where process.name == "ifconfig"]

Reviewer: Do you think it could make sense to change the query so the ordering is more obvious?
Like `process.name == "process1"`, `process.name == "process2"`, etc. It makes it a little bit more clear what's happening, because it's not totally easy to remember which command matches which state. Unfortunately it does make the dataset more abstract.

What about a middle ground, like...

* `attrib` -> state A
* `bash` -> state B
* `cat`  -> state C

----

The query's event items correspond to the following states:

* State A:  `[process where process.name == "whoami"]`
* State B:  `[process where process.name == "hostname"]`
* Complete: `[process where process.name == "ifconfig"]`

To find matching sequences, the query uses separate state machines for each
unique `user.name` value. Pending sequence matches move through each machine's
states as follows:

[source,txt]
----
{ "index" : { "_id" : "1" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "whoami" }, ...}

> // Creates sequence [1] in state A for the "root" user.

Reviewer: I'm also wondering if a visual representation could make it more digestible. Could be in addition to what's already there
```suggestion
// Creates sequence [1] in state A for the "root" user.
//
// root: A=[1]
```

Author: +1. This is a great idea. Added with 9066d7887b64ef6d21524debeee87580ee2f959d.

{ "index" : { "_id" : "2" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "whoami" }, ...}

> // Creates sequence [2] in state A for "root", overwriting sequence [1].

Reviewer: ````
// root: A=[2]
```

{ "index" : { "_id" : "3" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "hostname" }, ...}

> // Nothing happens. This event doesn't match state A for the "elkbee" user.

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure if "doesn't match state A" will be immediately clear to users reading the docs.
I'm wondering if we could say something more like this:
```suggestion
// Nothing happens. The "elkbee" user has no partial sequence to move from state A to state B
```

Author: Thanks for raising this. I incorporated your change with a minor update.

{ "index" : { "_id" : "4" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "hostname" }, ...}

> // Sequence [2, 4] moves to state B for "root".

Reviewer: since this is the first state transition, maybe we could be extra clear that we're moving the pending sequence out of state A, and appending a new event as part of the transition.
```suggestion
// Sequence [2] moves out of state A for "root". State B for "root" now contains [2, 4]

```

I recently was walking through the algorithm with another engineer and I think these were some of the points of confusion

Reviewer: ```
// root: B=[2,4]
```

====
A data set contains the following `process` events in ascending chronological
order:

[source,js]
----
{ "index" : { "_id" : "1" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "attrib" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "2" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "attrib" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "3" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "bash" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "4" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "bash" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "5" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "bash" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "6" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "attrib" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "7" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "attrib" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "8" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "bash" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "9" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "cat" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "10" } }
{ "user": { "name": "elkbee" }, "process": { "name": "cat" }, ...}
{ "index" : { "_id" : "11" } }
{ "user": { "name": "root" }, "process": { "name": "cat" }, ...}
----
// NOTCONSOLE

> An EQL sequence query searches the data set:

Reviewer 2: This can be a follow-up ticket; having a visual representation of the events, the potential sequences and the final sequences helps a lot in understanding how this works vs just the test description.
It doesn't have to be something fancy, a basic diagram or even ascii art would go a long way.

Author: Sounds good. I'll get this merged in and work on adding some diagrams as part of a separate PR.

Author: Related issue: #65888 65888
